Optimal Design of Unmanned Air Vehicles and Helicopter Rotors
###############################################################

| **Prof. Ranjan Ganguli**
| Satish Dhawan Chair Professor
| Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India


Discovery Room, E163 Student Union

Optimization methods are used for the preliminary design of a fixed-wing
medium-altitude long range unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV). A
multi-objective evolutionary optimization approach is used, and the full
Pareto front for endurance and weight as objectives is identified. A
Kriging metamodel is used to accelerate the optimization process.
Airfoil design for the UAV wing and preliminary structural design is
performed. Several Pareto optimal designs are identified and evaluated.
Aeroelastic optimization is performed for a composite helicopter rotor
in forward flight. A two-level optimization approach is used along with
response surfaces and genetic algorithms to address computational
efficiency and discrete design variables. The importance of composite
material uncertainty in aeroelastic analysis is identified, and a robust
design optimization is performed. Lastly, orthogonal array based
response surfaces are demonstrated for multi-objective reduction of
vibration and flap power for a helicopter with dual active trailing edge
flaps.

**Biodata**

Following his PhD at the University of Maryland in 1994, Dr. Ganguli
worked at the GE Research Lab in Schenectady, New York, and at Pratt and
Whitney, East Hartford, Connecticut. He joined the Aerospace Engineering
Department of the Indian Institute of Science as a faculty in 2000 and
currently holds the prestigious Satish Dhawan Chair Professorship. He
has held visiting positions at TU Braunschweig, University of Ulm and
Max Planck Institute of Metal Research, Stuttgart, in Germany;
University Paul Sabatier and Institute of Mathematics, in Toulouse,
France; Konkuk University in South Korea, the University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, in USA, and the Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
Dr. Ganguli is the author of 5 text books, 170 peer reviewed journal
papers and more than 150 conference papers.
