Computational and Experimental Turbomachinery Dynamics Research at the OSU Gas Turbine Laboratory (GTL)
##########################################################################################################

| **Kiron D'Souza**
| Assistant Professor
| The Ohio State University


Abstract
------------


Analysis of the dynamics and heat transfer in turbomachinery play a
critical role in the design process of aircraft engines. The work at the
GTL focuses on both experimentally and computationally investigating
research questions relating to the performance and operation of aircraft
engines using industrial components at actual operational conditions.
This talk will focus on the dynamics portion of the research conducted
at the GTL.

The experimental facilities for investigating turbomachinery dynamics at
the GTL consist of two spin facilities and a large above ground spin
tank. These facilities are designed to house full stage rotors with
actual industrial fan, turbine and/or compressor stages spinning at
engine speed. Traditionally, strain gauges have been used to measure the
response of the blades, but a recently acquired light probe measurement
system will enable tip-timing for capturing blade tip vibration
responses using a non-contact measurement system. The facilities have
previously been used for investigating blade tip-rubs, blade damping,
and a variety of other questions.

Standard industrial finite element models of a single sector of a bladed
disk are of the order of millions of degrees of freedom. Therefore
reduced order models (ROMs) of the system are often required when
studying these systems. Furthermore, there is always mistuning (small
random variations in each sector due to manufacturing tolerances and
in-service wear) that further complicates the analysis of these systems.
A variety of computational approaches such as cyclic symmetry analysis,
component mode synthesis and component mode mistuning are combined to
create accurate and compact ROMs that can be used to further investigate
the rotors and complement the experimental studies.

This talk will highlight some of the past computational work that has
been developed for modeling turbomachinery and give an overview of the
experimental facilities of the GTL. Current research directions will
also be discussed.

**Bio**

Dr. Kiran Dâ€™Souza is an Assistant Professor who joined the Ohio State
University (OSU) in 2014. He graduated from the University of Michigan
with his PhD in 2009. His research before joining OSU covered a wide
variety of dynamic and vibration topics from turbomachinery modeling to
forecasting bifurcations in nonlinear systems to structural health
monitoring. He currently works at the GTL at the Aerospace Research
Center (ARC) focusing primarily on experimental and analytical studies
of turbomachinery. Additional information can be found here:
http://gtl.osu.edu/
